---
layout: default
title: Intro to Math 135
category: math135
tag: math135
---

### Course Info

Instructor: Mukto Akash  
Office/Extension: MC 6508 x36655  
Email: mukto.akash@uwaterloo.ca  
Office Hours:  
Tuesdays noon - 2pm  
Thursdays 2 - 3pm  
Textbook: Reading, Discovering, and Writing Proofs Version 0.5 (0.42-0.5 work)    
Can be Acquired: at SCH as courseware    

The content below is heavily influenced on the courseware.  


### Notes on Learn

The Course Notes are titled  
– Reading, Discovering, and Writing Proofs  

**Statement:**  
If n is an integer, then $$n^2 ≥ n$$.


**Proof:**  
Since n is an integer, either n > 1, n = 0 or n < 0.  
When n > 1, multiply both sides by n to get $$n^2 > n$$.  
When n = 0, we have $$n^2$$ =0,so $$n^2 = n$$.  
Finally, when n < 0,we know that $$n^2 >0$$, so $$n^2 > n$$.  
In all cases, n2 ≥ n is satisfied.  


A **statement** is a sentence that has a definite state of being true or false.  

ex. 2 + 2 = 4 (true)  
3 + 2 < 5 (false)

not a statement: "Is 7 = 5?"  

## Definitions  

**Proposition**: A mathematical claim that is posed in the form of a statement that needs to be proven true or demonstrated false by a valid argument.  

**Theorem**: A particularly significant proposition.  

**Lemma**: A proposition that is used to help prove the theorem.  

**Corollary**: A proposition that follows a theorem.  

**Proposition 1**:  
For every real number x, $$x^2$$ + 1 ≥ 2x

**Proof**: a series of convincing arguments that leaves no doubt that the stated proposition is true.

**The Proof**:  
Suppose x is a real number.  
Therefore, x - 1 must be a real number, and hence  
$$(x-1)^2$$ ≥ 0  
Expanding the terms on the left gives $$x^2$$ - 2x + 1 ≥ 0. Adding 2x to both sides yields $$x^2$$ + 1 ≥ 2x.  

**Axiom**: A statement that is assumed to be true.
