---
layout: default
title: Mathematical Probability Models
category: stat230
tag: stat230
---

There are three ways to think about **probability**:  
1. The classical definition.  
2. Relative-frequency definition.  
3. The subjective probability/ personal-probability definition (probability as a measure of belief).  

1.  
Number of ways the event can occur/The total number of outcomes  
Note: All outcomes are “equally likely”.

2.  
When something happens (or can happen) over and over again, we can apply a relative-frequency interpretation.  

Probability of a specific outcome is defined as the proportion of times it occurs over the long run.  

3.  
Subjective Probability, since it is personal, there is no “single correct answer”.  

**Experiment** is any action, phenomenon or process that can be infinitely repeated, at least in theory.

**Trial** is a single repetition of the experiment.

**Sample Space** of an experiment denoted by S, is the set of all possible distinct outcomes of that experiment.

The Sample Space of rolling 1 die:

S = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}

2 dice:

S = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5 ... 36}

You can get 36 since $$6^2$$. There are two six sided dice.

The sample space may be either **discrete** or **non discrete** (continuous).
A sample space is **discrete** if it consists of a finite or countably infinite set of simple events.

S= {a1, a2, a3,...}
S= {1, 2, 3, 4,...} All positive integers. S= { 1/2, 1/3, 1/4, 1/5...} All rational numbers.
We say a set is discrete if the elements in it are 'separated'.

A sample space is **continuous** if it contains an interval (either finite or infinite ) of real numbers.
