---
layout: default
title: Negation, Start of Sets
category: math135
tag: math135
---

### Corollary

Let a and b be integers. If a \| b and b \| a, then a = ± b.

**Can we use Bounds by Divisibility (BBD) if we did not say a $$\ne$$ 0 and b $$\ne$$ 0**

The answer to that is we must consider a,b = 0 as a special case, and use BBD for other cases.

**Proof:**  

**Case 1:**
Since 0 | 0 and 0 $$\nmid$$ n for any non-zero integer n,  
then when a = 0, b must be zero and vice versa

**Case 2:**  
When a $$\ne$$ 0, and b $$\ne$$ 0  
From a | b and b $$\ne$$ 0, we can use BBD to get |a| $$\le$$ |b|  
From b | a and a $$\ne$$ 0, we can use BBD to get |b| $$\le$$ |a|  
Hence |a| = |b|  
Therefore a = ± b  

## Negating an Implication

A $$\Rightarrow$$ B and $$\lnot$$A v B are the same

| A | B | A $$\Rightarrow$$ B | $$\lnot$$A | not A v B |
|---|---|--------|-------|-----------|
| T | T | T      | F     | T         |
| T | F | F      | F     | F         |
| F | T | T      | T     | T         |
| F | F | T      | T     | T         |

$$\lnot$$(A $$\Rightarrow$$ B) $$\equiv$$ $$\lnot$$(($$\lnot$$A) v B)  
$$\equiv$$ (($$\lnot$$($$\lnot$$A)) $$\land$$ ($$\lnot$$ B))  
$$\equiv$$ A $$\land$$ ($$\lnot$$ B)  

In A then B **Implication**  
A and not B **Negated Implication**  

If a \| b and b\|c then a\|c.  
**Negated Implication:**  
a \| b and b \| c and a $$\nmid$$ c  

If a \| bc then a\|b or a\|c.  
**Negated Implication:**  
a \| bc and a $$\nmid$$ b and a $$\nmid$$ c

If a \| b and b $$\ne$$ 0, then\|a\|≤\|b\|.  
**Negated Implication:**  
a \| b and b $$\ne$$ 0 and \|a\| > \|b\|

## Divisibility of Integer Combinations.
“If m is an integer and 14 \| m,  
prove that 7 \| 135m + 693”.  
Note that 7 $$\nmid$$ 135, so this is not a straight-forward result.

Recall previously: **Proposition (Divisibility of Integer Combinations (DIC))**  
Let a, b and c be integers.  
If a \| b and a \| c, then for any integers x and y, a \| (bx + cy).  

**Proof:**
Assume 14 \| m  
Since 7 \| 14, by Transivity of Divisibility 7 \| m  
m = 7k, for some integer k  

Now 135m + 693 = 135(7k) + 7(99) = 7(135k + 99)  
As 135k + 99 is an integer, 7 \| (135m + 693)  

## Converse

Given an implication:

If A then B.

the **converse** of "If A then B" (A $$\Rightarrow$$ B)
is "If B then A"                  (B $$\Rightarrow$$ A)  

An implication and its converse are not logically related.

##Sets

Sets are collection of objects, called **elements** or **members**

∅ = { }. The empty-set has nothing in it.  
{∅} has one element, namely the empty set, so  
{∅} ≠ ∅.  

$$\mathbb{R}$$ is the set of real numbers. This is essentially the set that contains every possible number we have seen (unless you have seen complex numbers).  

$$\mathbb{Q}$$ is the set of rational numbers. These are numbers of the type 2, 1, 5 , 2, etc. The members
are fractions, with numerator and denominator both being integers, and denominator cannot be zero.

$$\mathbb{Z}$$ = {...,−3,−2,−1,0,1,2,3,...}, the set of integers (whole numbers)  

$$\mathbb{N}$$ = {1,2,3,...}, the set of natural numbers (positive integers). Note that in MATH 135, N starts at 1 and 0 ∉ N. This may be different that what you learn in CS.
