---
layout: default
title: List of Propositions
category: math135
tag: math135
---

List Starting with GCD Propositions:

## GCD
The greatest common divisor of integers a and b,  
where a $$\ne$$ 0 or b $$\ne$$ 0, is an integer d $$\gt$$ 0 such that  
- d | a, d | b, and  
- for all c ∈ $$\mathbb{Z}$$, if c | a and c \| b, then c $$\le$$ d

## GCD with Remainders (GCD WR)  
If a,b,q,r are integers such that  
a = qb+r, then gcd(a, b) = gcd(b, r)  

## GCD Characterization Theorem (GCD CT)  
Let a, b be integers, not both zero, and d ∈ $$\mathbb{N}$$  
- If d | a and d | b,and  
- There exist x, y ∈ $$\mathbb{Z}$$ such that d = ax+by  
Then d = gcd(a, b).  

## EEA (EEA Theorem (a.k.a Bezout’s Lemma))
Let a, b ∈ Z. Then d = gcd(a, b) can be computed, and there exist x , y ∈ $$\mathbb{Z}$$  
such that d = ax + by.   

## EEA shows converse of GCD CT is true
Let a, b ∈ Z, not both zero, and d ∈ N.  
If d = gcd(a, b)  
then  
- d | a and d | b  
- There exist x, y ∈ $$\mathbb{Z}$$ such that d = ax+by.  

## GCD of One (GCD OO)  
Let a and b be integers.  
Then gcd(a, b) = 1  
if and only if there exist integers x and y with ax + by = 1.

## GCD DB (DB GCD))
Let a and b be integers.
If gcd(a, b) = d $$\ne$$ 0, then gcd( $$\frac{a}{d} , \frac{b}{d}$$ ) = 1.

## Coprime
We say integers a and b are coprime if and only if gcd(a, b) = 1.  

## Coprimes and Divisibility (CAD)
Let a, b, c ∈ $$\mathbb{Z}$$.
If c | ab and gcd( a , c ) = 1, then c | b.

## Primes
An integer p > 1 is said to be a prime if and only if the only positive divisors of p are 1 and p itself.  

## Primes and Divisibilty
Let p be a prime and a, b ∈ $$\mathbb{Z}$$.  
If p | (ab) then p | a or p | b.  

## (Infinitely Many Primes (INF P))
There are infinitely many primes.  

## (Prime Factorization (PF))
For every integer n > 1,  
n can be written as a product of primes.  

## Linear Diophantine Equation 1 (LDE1)  
Let a, b ∈ $$\mathbb{Z}$$ and gcd(a, b) = d.  
The linear Diophantine equation ax + by = c has a solution iff d | c.  

## Linear Diophantine Equation 2 (LDE2)

Let gcd(a,b) = d where a $$\ne$$ 0 and b $$\ne$$ 0 are integers.  
If x = $$x_0$$ and y = $$y_0$$ is one particular integer solution to the linear diophantine equation ax + by = c,  
then the complete integer solution is
x = $$x_0$$ + $$\frac{b}{d}n$$, y = $$y_0$$−$$\frac{a}{d}n, ∀ n ∈ $$\mathbb{Z}$$

# Congruence
Let m be a fixed positive integer.  
If a, b ∈ $$\mathbb{Z}$$ we say that a is congruent to b modulo m  
if and only if m | (a − b).

## Congruence is an Equivalent Relation
Let m ∈ $$\mathbb{N}$$. Let a,b,c∈Z. Then
1. a ≡ a (mod m). **(reflexivity)**
2. a ≡ b (mod m)⇒ b ≡ a (mod m). **(symmetry)**
3. a ≡ b (mod m) and b ≡ c (mod m)⇒ a ≡ c (mod m). **(transitivity)**

## Unique Remainder
Let a ∈ $$\mathbb{Z}$$ and m ∈ $$\mathbb{N}$$.  
Then there exists a unique integer 0 ≤ r < m such that a ≡ r (mod m).

## Congruent If and Only If Remainder
Let m ∈ N, a, b ∈ Z.
Then a ≡ b (mod m) if and only if
a and b have the same remainder when divided by m.

## Properties of Modular Congruence
Let a,a′,b,b′ ∈Z. If a ≡ a′ (mod m)and b ≡ b′ (mod m), then  
1. a + b ≡ a′+ b′ (mod m)
2. a − b ≡ a′− b′ (mod m)
3. ab ≡ a′b′ (mod m)

## Congruence and Division
Let a,b,c ∈ Z, m ∈ N and c $$\ne$$ 0 (mod m).  
If ac ≡ bc (mod m) and gcd(c,m)=1,then a≡b (mod m).

## Linear Congruence
Given m ∈ $$\mathbb{N}$$ and a,c ∈ $$\mathbb{Z}$$, the relation ax ≡ c (mod m),  
where x is a variable, is called a linear congruence.  
We wish to find (i.e., solve for) all integer values of x  

### Brute Force vs. EEA:
Solve 5x ≡ 3 (mod 7).  
Exercise: can use CISR and trial and error to get $$x_0$$ = 2
and then PC to deduce x ≡ 2 (mod 7).  
Solution: Convert 5x ≡ 3 (mod 7) into the LDE 5x + 7y = 3. Use the EEA table to solve.  

## Linear Congruence Theorem Version 1 (LCT 1)  
Let gcd(a, m) = d $$\ne$$ 0.  
The linear congruence ax ≡ c (mod m) has a solution if
and only if d | c.  
Moreover, if x = $$x_0$$ is one particular solution, then the
complete solution is x ≡ $$x_0$$ (mod m)  

## Congruence Class  
Let a ∈ Z. Define  
[a] = {x ∈ $$\mathbb{Z}$$ : x ≡ a (modm)}  
to be the congruence class of a modulo m.

### Arithmetic Operations for Congruence Classes
Given a, b ∈ Z, i.e., [a], [b] ∈ $$\mathbb{Z_m}$$,
- Addition: [a]+[b] = [a + b ]  
- Subtraction: [a] − [b] = [a − b]  
- Multiplication: [a] · [b] = [a · b].  
**We do not directly define division.**

## Linear Congruence Theorem, Version 2 (LCT 2)  
Let gcd(a, m) = d $$\ne$$ 0.  
The equation \[a\]\[x\] = [c] in $$\mathbb{Z_m}$$ has a solution if and only if d | c.  
Moreover, if [x] = [x0] is one particular solution, then the complete solution is  
{[$$x_0$$],[$$x_0$$ + m],[$$x_0$$ +2m],...,[$$x_0$$ +(d −1)$$\frac{m}{d}$$]}  

## Existence of Inverses
$$[a]^−1$$ exists in $$\mathbb{Z_m}$$ iff gcd(a, m) = 1  

The inverse of [a] in $$\mathbb{Z_m}$$ is unique (if it exists).  

## Fermat's Little Theorem (FLT)
If p is a prime number,a ∈ $$\mathbb{Z}$$ and p $$\ne$$ a,  
then $$a^p−1$$ ≡ 1 (mod p).  

## Corollaries to FLT
If p is a prime number,and a ∈ Z,then $$a^p$$ ≡ a (mod p)  

If p is a prime number and [a] $$\ne$$ [0] in $$\mathbb{Z_p}$$,  
then $$[a]^{−1}$$ = $$[a^{p−2}]$$.  

## Chinese Remainder Theorem  
If gcd($$m_1$$, $$m_2$$) = 1, then for any choice of integers $$a_1$$ and $$a_2$$, there exists a solution to the simultaneous congruences  
n ≡ $$a_1$$ (mod $$m_1$$)   
n ≡ $$a_2$$ (mod $$m_2$$)  
Moreover, if n = $$n_0$$ is one integer solution, then the complete solution is n ≡ $$n_0$$ (mod $$m_1m_2$$).

## Proposition (Splitting Modulus (SM))  
Let p and q be coprime positive integers. Then for any two integers x and a,
x ≡ a (mod p)  
x ≡ a (mod q)  
⇐⇒ x ≡ a (mod pq).  

## RSA
Proposition (RSA)
Let p, q be primes with p $$\ne$$ q.  
All variables introduced below are integers.  
Let n = pq and φ(n)=(p−1)(q−1).  
Let1<e,d<φ(n)  
such that ed≡1 (mod(p−1)(q−1)).  
Let 0 ≤M<n.  
If 0 ≤ C< n such that $$M^e$$ ≡C (mod n) and    
0 ≤ R<n such that $$C^d$$ ≡ R (mod n),  
then R = M.  

## Complex Numbers
A complex number in standard form is an expression of the form:
x + yi where x , y ∈ R.

### Addition:
(a+bi)+(c+di)=(a+b)+(b+d)i  

### Complex Multiplication:
(a + bi)(c + di) = (ac − bd) + (ad + bc)i  

## Complex Conjugate
The complex conjugate of z = x +yi (x,y ∈ R) is the complex number $$\bar{z}$$ = x − yi.

## Properties of Conjugate (PCJ)
If z and w are complex numbers, then
$$\bar{z+w}$$ = $$\bar{z}+\bar{w}$$  
$$\bar{zw}$$ = $$\bar{z}\bar{w}$$  
$$\bar{(\bar{z})}$$ = z  
z+$$\bar{z}$$ =2R(z)  
z−$$\bar{z}$$ =2iI(z)  

## Modulus
The modulus of z = x + yi (x, y ∈ R) is the non-negative real number |z| = |x + yi| = $$sqrt{x^2 + y^2}.$$

## Properties of Modulus
If z,w ∈ C, then
|z|=0 iff z=0
|z| = |z|
$$\bar{z}$$z=|z|2
|zw| = |z||w|
|z + w| ≤ |z| + |w|. (This is called the triangle inequality)

## Polar Form

r = $$\sqrt{x^2 + y^2}$$ (distance from origin)  
and θ is an angle (measured counter-clockwise from
positive x-axis) such that:  
r cos θ = x  
r sin θ = y  

## Polar Form Multiplication  
If $$z_1$$ =$$r_1$$($$cosθ_1+i sinθ_1$$)and $$z_2$$   =$$r_2$$($$cosθ_2+isinθ_2$$) are two complex numbers in polar form, then  
$$z_1 z_2$$ = r1r2(cos(θ1 + θ2) + i sin($$θ_1 + θ_2$$)).  

## De Moivre's Theorem
If θ ∈ R and n ∈ Z, then   
$$(cosθ+i sinθ)^n$$ =(cos nθ+i sin nθ)    

## Exponentiation
For notational convenience, we define  
$$e^{iθ}$$ = cos(θ) + i sin(θ)  
for θ ∈ R.  

## Complex N-th Roots Theorem
Proposition (CNRT)
Suppose w is a non-zero complex number written in its polar form as w = r [cos(θ) + i sin(θ)].  
Then there are exactly n distinct complex solutions to zn = w, labeled z0,z1,...,zn−1 whose polar forms are given by   
$$z_k$$ = $$sqrt[n]{r}$$[cos($$\frac{θ+2πk}{n}$$+ i sin($$\frac{θ+2πk}{n}$$)]  
for k = 0,1,...,(n−1), and $$sqrt[n]{r} is the real, positive, $$n^th$$ root of r.  

## Proposition (DAP)  
If f (x), g(x) ∈ F[x] and g(x) is not the zero polynomial, then there exist unique polynomials q(x), r(x) ∈ F[x]  
such that f (x) = q(x)g(x) + r(x) with r(x) being the zero polynomial or deg(r(x)) < deg(g(x))  

## Remainder Theorem (RT)  
Suppose f(x) ∈ F[x] and c ∈ F.  
The remainder when the  
polynomial f (x) is divided by x − c is f (c).
