---
layout: default
title: Up to Chapter 4 Notes
category: engl109
tag: engl109
---

## Glossary of Terms
**Subject:** Who or what a setence is about. (**Biologists** often study animals.)  
**Verb:** The part of a setence that asserts something about a subject.(Biologists often **study** animals.)
**Noun:** A word that names a person, thing, quality, place, or idea.  
**Helping Verb:** A verb used with another verb to convey time, obligation, or other meaning. (**was** drilling, **would have been** drilling)  
**Passive Voice:** The verb form used when the subject names the receiver of the verb's action. (The house **was destroyed** by the tornado.)
**Active Voice:** The verb form used when the subject names the performer of the verb's action. (The tornado **destroyed** the house.)
**Main Clause:** A word group that can stand alone as a sentence, containing a subject, and a verb not beginning with a subordinating word. (The books were expensive)  
**Modifier:** A word or word group that describes another word or word group (**sweet** candy, running **in the park**)  
**Coordinating Conjunctions**: And, but, or, nor, and sometimes for, so , yet.  
**Conjunctive Adverbs:** Modifiers that describe the relation of the ideas in two cleauses such as hence, however, indeed, and thus.  
**Subordinate Clause:** A word group that contains a subject and a verb beginning with a subordinating word such as **because** or **who** and is not a question. (Words can do damage **when they hurt feelings.**)  
**Phrase:** A word group that lacks a subject or verb or both. (Words can do damage **by hurting feelings.**)  
**Correlative Conjunctions:** Pairs of words that connect elements of the same kind and importance, such as both... and, either... or, neither... nor, not...but, not only... but also.  
**Adverb:** A word or word group that describes a verb or an adjective, another adverb, or a whole sentence. (dressed **sharply**, **clearly** unhappy, soaring **from the mountain**)  
**Adjective:** A word or word group that describes a noun or pronoun. (**sweet** smile, **certain** someone)  


# Chapter 3

## Emphasis

Subjects and verbs are underlined.  
Unemphatic:  
The __intention__ of the company __was__ to expand its workforce. A __proposal__ __was__ also __made__ to diversify the backgrounds and abilities of employees.  

Revised:  
The __company__ __intended__ to expand its workforce. __It__ also __proposed__ to diversify the backgrounds and abilities of employees.

| Unemphatic | Emphatic |
| was influential | influenced |
| is a glorification | glorifies |
| have a preference| prefer |
| had the appearance | appeared, seemed |
| made a claim | claimed|

## Using Sentence Beginnings and Endings
**Cumulative:** Sentence begins with a main clause and adds modifiers.

ex. Education has no equal in opening minds, instilling values, and creating opportunities   

**Periodic:** Saves the main clause until just before the end of the sentence.  

ex. In opening minds, instilling values, and creating opportunities, education has no equal.  

**Subordination:** Indicate that some elements in a sentence are less important others for your meaning.  

## Parallelism
Similarity of grammatical form elements of meaning with a sentence or among sentences.  

## Variety and Details
**Adverb modifiers:** (ex. **For a week**, he relentlessly cross-examined the witness, modifies cross-examined)  
**Adjective modifiers:** (ex. The witness had been **expecting to be dismissed within an hour**, modifies witness)  
**Transitional expressions:** (such as indeed)  

## Appropriate and Exact Words
- dialect and nonstandard language  
- slang (common experiences to make technical references efficient)  
- colloquial language (everyday language)  
- technical words  
- indirect and pretentious writing  
- sexist and other biased language  

## Choosing the Right Words
**Abstract words:** name, qualities, and ideas  
**Concrete words:** name things we can know by our five senses  
**General words:** name classes or group of things  
**Specific words:** limit a general class  
**Idioms:** expressions in language  

# Chapter 4

## Parts of Speech
Nouns  
**Common nouns:**  name general classes of things that do no begin with capital letters.  
**Proper nouns:** name specific people.  
**Count nouns:** name things considered countable in English. Most add -s or -es.  
**Noncount nouns:** name things that aren't considered countable.
**Collective nouns:** are singular in form but name groups.

Pronouns  
**Personal pronouns:** refer to a specific individual or to individuals (I, you, he she, we)  
**Indefinite pronouns:** everybody or some, function as nouns.  
**Relative Pronouns:** who, whoever, which, that, relate groups of words to nouns  
**Interrogative pronouns:** who, which, and what (introduce questions)  
**Demonstrative pronouns:** this, that, and such (identify or point to nouns)  
**Intensive pronouns:** a persona pronoun plus -self or -selves (himself, ourselves)   
**Reflexive pronouns:** have the same form as intensive pronouns but indicate that the sentence subject also receives the action of the verb (They injured **themselves**)    

## Forms of Verbs
pg. 154

**plain form:** dictionary form of the verb.  
**-s form:** ends in -s or -es.  
**past-tense:** action occured before. (usually has -d or -ed)  
**past participle:** past tense for irregular verbs (combines have or be to has **climbed**, was **created**)  
**present participle:** adds -ing to plain form (is **buying**), modifies nouns and pronouns (**boiling water**) or functions as a noun (**running exhausts me**)  

Helping verbs:
- **was** sleeping, **had been** working

Prepositions:
- form nouns or pronouns (**about** love, **down** the stairs)

Subordinating Conjunctions:
- form sentences into word groups called subordinate clauses(**when** the meeting ended)

## Sentence
- simple subject: one or more nouns  
- complete subject: includes any modifiers
- simple predicate: one or more verbs
- complete predicate: add any words to complete the meaning plus modifiers

Intransitive verb: does not require a following word to complete meaning. (The earth **trembled**)

Transitive verb: requires a direct object to complete the meaning. (The city was **destroyed**)

Subject complement: renames or describes subject (The result was **chaos**)
Linking verb: links subject to description (The result **was** chaos)

indirect object: word identifying action of the verb (The government sent **the city** aid)

object complement: verb followed by direct object and an object complement
The citizens considered **the earthquake** a disaster

## Phrases and Subordinate Clauses
prepositional phrase: consists of a preposition plus a noun (of, on, with, upon, from)  
verbal phrase: modifiers or nouns (the sun **rising** over the dump)  
participle phrases: present participles (ending in -ing) or past participles (usually ending in -d or -ed)  
gerund: -ing fomr of a verb that acts as a noun.  
infinitive: verb plus **to**  
absolute phrases: noun or pronoun and a participle plus modifiers (**their own place established** many ethnic groups are making way for new arrivals)      appositive phrases: noun that renames another noun. (Bizen ware, **a dark stoneware**, is produced in Japan.)  
adjective clause: modifies a noun or pronoun (parents **who are illiterate** may have bad memories of school)  
adverb clause: modifies a verb, an adjective, another adverb, word group (The school began teaching parents)  

## Sentence Types
simple: single main clause no subordinate clause. (last summer was unsuaully hot)  
compound: two or more clauses and no subordinate clause. (Last July was hot, but August was even hotter)  
complex: one main clause and one or more subordinate clause. (Rain finally came, although many had left the area by then)  
compound-complex: two or more clauses and at least one subordinate clause  

## Verbs
regular: if the past and present is -d or -ed to the plain form
irregular: not regular  

tense: shows the time of a verb's action  

Mood:
- indicative: states a fact or asks a question (the theatre **needs** help)  
- imperative mood: expresses a command or digives a direction (**Help the theatre**)  
- subjunctive mood: expresses a suggestion, requirement (I wish I were)

## Case
- subjective: subject or subject complement
- objective case: word is an object of a verb or preposition
- possessive caseL words owns or is the source of a noun
