---
layout: default
title: Probability Notation, Odds, and Rules of Probability
category: stat230
tag: stat230
---

What is the sample space if the experiment consist s of measuring (in hours) the life time of a transistor?

S=

The sample space consist of all nonnegative real numbers. (This is a continuous sample space)

**An event** is any collection (subset) of outcomes contained in the sample space S.  
- **Simple** if it consists of exactly one outcome (point).  
- **Compound** it consists of more than one outcome.  

## Probability Notation

- We use the notation P(event) = p to denote the probability of an event occurring and (1-p) it will not occur
- Probability of heads occurring is P(heads)
- P(heads) = 0.4 indicates an unfair coin that turns up head 40% of the time.

The odds in favour of an event A is defined by
$$\frac{P(A)}{P(A^c)} = \frac{P(A)}{1- P(A)}$$

**Example**  
If P(A) = 2 / 3 what are the odds of A (odds in favour of A)?  
1 - P(A) =1/3
Odds (A) = $$\frac{P(A)}{1-P(A)}$$ = 2 : 1

Let S = { $$a_1, a_2,...a_n$$} be a sample space.  
Let P ($$a_i$$), i= 1, 2,..., n be the probabilities to the $$a_i$$’s.  

The probability of an arbitrary compound event A can be determined by summing the probabilities of simple events in A.  
A = { $$a_1, a2,...a_k$$}  

If each simple event has probability $$\frac{1}{n}$$ ( i.e. “equally likely”).  
P(A) = $$\frac{k}{n}$$

**Example**  
Suppose a 6-sided fair die is rolled, what is the probability of getting an even number ?  
Let A = “even number" A = {2, 4, 6}  
P (A) = P (2) + P (4) + P (6) = 1/2.  

## Rules of Probability

### Rule 1
$$\sum$$ (Of all i) P ($$a_i$$) =1 , P (S) = 1

### Rule 2
For any event A, 0 ≤ P(A) ≤ 1  
Probabilities are always between 0 and 1  
0: event never happens,  
1: event always happens.  

### Rule 3
If A and B are two events with A ⊆ B   
(that is, all of the points in A are also in B)  
then P(A) ≤ P(B)  

## Mutually Exclusive or Disjoint Events

Two events are mutually exclusive  
- If they cannot happen simultaneously.  
- If they cannot occur at the same time.  

**Example**  
Tossing a coin once, which can result in either heads or tails, but not both.  
