---
layout: default
title: Divisibility
category: math135
tag: math135
---
## Analysis of a Proof:

## Divisibility of integers

An integer m **divides** an integer n, and we write m \| n, when there exists an integer k so n = km.

If m \| n, then we say that m is a **divisor** or a **factor** of n, and that n is a **multiple** of m or than n is **divisible by** m.

3 \| 6 since 6 = 3 * 2. That is, there exists an integer k such that 6 = 3k.

For all integers a, a \| 0 since 0 = 0 * a. This is true for a = 0 as well.

## Transivity of Divisibility

Let a, b, and c be integers. If a \| b and b \| c, then a \| c.

**Proof:**    
Assume a \| b and b \| c.  
Since a \| b there exists an integer r so that ra = b.  
Since b \| c there exists an integer s so that sb = c.  
Substituting ra for b in the previous equation, we get (sr)a = c.  
Since sr is an integer, a \|c.

##Divisibility of Integer Combinations (DIC)

Let a, b, and c be integers. If a \| b and a \| c, then for any integers x and y, a \| (bx + cy)

Since we are proving an implication, not using it we assume the hypothesis is true to demonstrate the conclusion is true. This is called a **Direct Proof**.

**Proof**:  
Assume a \| b and a \| c.  
Since a \| b there exists an integer m so that ma = b  
Since a \| c there exists an integer j so that ja = c  
Let x and y be integers.  
bx + cy = (ma)x + (ja)y = a (mx +jy)  
Since mx + jy is an integer, it follows the definition of divisibility that a \| (bx + cy)  


##Proof of Bounds by Divisibility  

###Bounds by Divisibility (BBD)

Let a and b be integers, If a \| b and b $$\ne$$ 0, then \|a\| $$\le$$ \|b\|.

**Proof:**  
Since a \| b, there exists an integer k so that b = ka.  
Since b $$\ne$$ 0, k $$\ne$$ 0
But if k $$\ne$$ 0, \|k\| $$\ge$$ 1  
Hence \|b\| = \|ka\| = \|k\|\|a\| $$\ge$$ \|a\|  
(You can multiply \|k\| $$\ge$$ 1 by \|a\| to get \|k\|\|a\| $$\ge$$ \|a\|)
