---
layout: default
title: Set Equality and Quantifiers
category: math135
tag: math135
---
## If and Only If  

| A | B | A $$\leftrightarrow$$ B |
|---|---|-------------------------|
| T | T | T                       |
| T | F | F                       |
| F | T | F                       |
| F | F | T                       |

When A = B, A $$\leftrightarrow$$ B is True.

## Proof  

If S = T, then S ∪ T and S ∩ T  

**("$$\rightarrow$$")**

Assume S = T  
Let x ∈ S ∩ T, then (x ∈ S) ∧ (x ∈ T)    
Hence (x ∈ S) ∧ (x ∈ T)  
Therefore (x ∈ S) v (x ∈ T)  


Therefore x ∈ S ∪ T, so S ∩ T ⊆ S ∪ T  
On the other hand, let y ∈ S ∪ T  
Then (y ∈ S) v (y ∈ T)  

At least one of y ∈ S or y ∈ T is a true statement.
Without loss of generality (WLOG), assume y ∈ S  
From assumption S = T, so when y ∈ S, then y ∈ T   
Thus  S ∪ T ⊆ S ∩ T  

**("$$\leftarrow$$")**  

S ∪ T = S ∩ T then S = T  
Assume S ∪ T = S ∩ T  
let (x ∈ S) then (x ∈ S) v (x ∈ T)  
Thus x ∈ S ∪ T.  
Since S ∪ T = S ∩ T, x ∈ S ∩ T  
Hence (x ∈ S) ∧ (x ∈ T)  
Thus x ∈ T. Therefore S ⊆ T  
Similarly, T ⊆ S  
Therefore S = T

## Quantifiers

quantifier, variable, domain, open sentence

For all x ∈ $$\mathbb{R}$$, $$x^2$$ + 1 $$\ge$$ 2x

**Universal Quantifer:** "For all"  
**Variable:** x  
**Domain:** "$$\mathbb{R}$$"    
**Open Sentence:** $$x^2$$ + 1 $$\ge$$ 2x  

**For every natural number n, 2$$n^2$$ + 11n + 15 is composite**  
**Proof:**  
Let n ∈ $$\mathbb{N}$$  
2$$n^2$$ + 11n + 15 = (2n + 5)(n + 3)    
Since n $$\ge$$ 1, 2n + 5 $$\ge$$ 2 and (n + 3) $$\ge$$ 2    
Also: n ∤ 3 $$\ne$$ (2$$n^2$$ + 11n + 15) as 2n + 5 $$\ne$$ 1    
as 2n + 5 ∈ $$\mathbb{Z}$$, (n + 3) | (2$$n^2$$ + 11n + 15)    
So 2$$n^2$$ + 11n + 15 is composite    

**$$\forall$$ x ∈ $$\mathbb{Z}$$, a | (bx + c)**  
**Proof:**  

Pick x = 1  
a \| (b(1) + c)  
a \| b + c  

**In this case we use the substitution method**  

## The Select Method    
**Used to Prove $$\forall$$ x ∈ S, P(x):**  

Select a representative mathematical object x ∈ S. This cannot be a specific object. It has to be a placeholder, (a variable) that the argument would work for any specific member of S.  

Then show that the open sentence P would work for any representative x.  

**For each x ∈ $$\mathbb{R}$$, x < x + 1**   
**Proof:**  
Let x be a real number.  
Therefore (x + 1) - (x) = 1    
Since (x + 1) - (x) > 0  
x < x + 1 is true  
Thus, by **select method**, x ∈ $$\mathbb{R}$$, x < x + 1 is a true statement  

**For every natural number n, n $$\le$$ $$n^2$$**  
**Proof:**  
Let P(x): x $$\le$$ $$n^2$$. We know that the set of natural numbers is given by  

$$\mathbb{N}$$ = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, ...}  

Let n ∈ $$\mathbb{N}$$.  
Since n is a natural number, n $$\ge$$ 1
Multiply both sides of the inequality by n (note: n is positive) to generality

n * n $$\ge$$ n * 1  
$$n^2$$ $$\ge$$ n

Thus, P(n) is true.
Therefore, by the select method, $$\forall$$ n ∈ $$\mathbb{N}$$, P(n) is a true statement.

## Existential Quantifier

$$\exists$$  x ∈ S, P(x)  

Also means:  

1. There is an x ∈ S such that P(x) is true  
2. P(x) is true for some x ∈ S  
3. At least one x ∈ S satisfies P(x)  
4. S has an element x such that P(x) is satisfied  

## The Construct Method  

**Used to prove $$\exists$$ x ∈ S, P(x)**  

**$$\exists$$ x ∈ {1,2,3,4}, such that x is even**  

**Proof:**  
Consider x = 2. Since 2 is an element of the given domain, and 2 is even, therefore the above statement is true.

| Quantified statement | When True?    | When False |
|----------------------|---------------|------------|
| $$\forall$$ x ∈ S, P(x) | P(x) is true for every element in S | P(x) is false for at least one element in S |
| $$\exists$$ x ∈ S, P(x) | P(x) is true for at least one element in S | P(x) is false for every element in S |

# Assuming a Quantified Statement is True

## The Substitution Method

**Used to prove $$\forall$$ x ∈ S, P(x)**

Substitute an appropriate value of x from S into the open sentence P, and use the fact that P(x) must be true to arrive at the desired conclusion.

**If $$\forall$$ x ∈ $$\mathbb{N}$$, n \| x then n = 1**  

The trick here is to use an appropriate value of x from $$\mathbb{N}$$ that helps give the conclusion of n = 1.  
**Proof:**  
Assume $$\forall$$ x ∈ $$\mathbb{N}$$, n \| x.  
Since x ∈ $$\mathbb{N}$$, consider x = 1. By our own assumption n \| 1.  
We know that the only positive divisor of 1 is 1 itself. Therefore n = 1.  

## The Object Method

**Used to prove $$\exists$$ x ∈ S, P(x), it true**  

Use a symbol such as s to denote an element of S for which P(x) is true. Since we do not know exactly which element of S satisfies P, we cannot assign a specific value to x. Instead we use x as a variable.

**Let n be an integer. Prove the following statement about n:**  
If n is of the form 4l + 1 for some positive integer l, then 8 \| ($$n^2$$ -1)  

$$\exists$$ l ∈ $$\mathbb{Z}$$, such that n = 4l + 1  

Our goal is to prove 8 \| ($$n^2$$ - 1),  
which is equivalent to proving that k ∈ $$\mathbb{Z}$$, 8k = ($$n^2$$ - 1)  

**Proof:**
Assume, by the **object method**, that we can write n = 4l + 1 for some integer l.  
let k = $$2l^2$$ + l. Since l is an integer, therefore k must be also an integer.  
In that case, $$n^2$$ - 1 = $$(4l + 1)^2$$ - 1 = $$16l^2$$ + 8l + 1 - 1  
$$16l^2$$ + 8l = 8($$2l^2$$ + l) = 8k  

Thus according to the **construct method**, we have shown that k ∈ $$\mathbb{Z}$$, 8k = ($$n^2$$ - 1)  
Therefore 8 \| ($$n^2$$ -1)
